MSC3244: Room version capabilities (#3244)
matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals: proposals/3244-room-version-capabilities.md

# MSC3244: Room version capabilities

Room version updates can bring new functionalities, for example v7 is introducing `knocking`.

There is a delay before a room version becomes the default version (when supported by enough home servers).
And when creating rooms clients should not ask for a specific version (or else they will stick to this
specific version unless they are updated).

So currently clients can't know before creating the room if a feature they need will be supported by the created room.

> The goal of this MSC is to give the client a way to have more informations on the supported features of room
> versions available on a given server, to give more feedbacks to users during room creation as well as

Reviewer: While I'm nit-picking, I might as well add some grammar corrections too.

```suggestion
The goal of this MSC is to give the client a way to have more information on the supported features of room
versions available on a given server, to give more feedback to users during room creation as well as
```

in the room settings section.

## Proposal

The __m.room_versions capability__  [`/_matrix/client/r0/capabilities`]([https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/r0.6.1#m-room-versions-capability])
endpoint could be decorated to provide more information on room version capabilities.

Actual capabilities response:
````
{
  "capabilities": {
    "m.room_versions": {
      "default": "6",
      "available": {
        "1": "stable",
        "2": "stable",
        "3": "stable",
        "4": "stable",
        "5": "stable",
        "6": "stable",,

>         "org.matrix.msc2176": "unstable",

Reviewer 2: is it deliberate that these unstable room versions are removed in the below example?

Author: kind of, the below example is the future compared to that one, but it was also to reduce noise

Reviewer 2: okay, then need to add a line to make it clear that between the two examples, the unstable versions were stabilised.

Author: added some context

        "org.matrix.msc3083": "unstable"
      }
    },
    "m.change_password": {...}
  }
}
````

Proposed modification

````
{
  "capabilities": {
    "m.room_versions": {
      "default": "6",
      "available": {
        "1": "stable",
        "...,
        "6": "stable",
        "7": "stable",
        "8": "stable",
        "9": "stable"
      },
      "room_capabilities": {

>           "knocking" : {

Reviewer 2: should we not namespace these to m.knocking or whatever? if only for symmetry with all our other identifiers?

Author: will check and use same name

Author: updaded to `knock` as per MSC

Reviewer 3: I also agree that these attributes should be namespaced as `m.*`, otherwise it gets inconsistent with the rest of the spec.

Author: the top level att are name spaces (m.room_versions, m.change_password) but not the content attributes (default/available/room_capabilities)

>               "best": "7",

Reviewer: (bikeshedding) I think `preferred` would be better than `best`

              "support" : ["7"]
          },
          "msc3083" : {
              "best": "9",
              "support" : ["8", "9"]
          }
      }
    }
  }
}
````

A new object is added under `room_capabilities`, each key is the name of a capability.
This object provides the list of room versions supporting this capability as well as the preferred version to use.

As part of this MSC, two capabilities are defined:
- msc2403 a.k.a knocking join rule support

> - msc3083 a.k.a restricted join rule support 

Reviewer: In general, I think that we should be using meaningful names like `knocking` and `restricted_join` rather than MSC numbers.

Author: thx, updated with meaningful names

When presenting room settings, clients should use capabilities in order to display the correct UI. 

For example if the room support knocking, the client should add this option in the join rule chooser
(and if not only show `Invite Only` and `Public` for example).

When creating a room, the client could check if the needed feature is supported by the server before creating.

If the feature is not supported, the client could inform the user that this type of room can't be created
as well as an information message explaining how to contact the home server admin.

If the feature is supported by the default room version, then just continue as usual.

If the feature is supported but by a stable room version that is not the default one, the client should
then request to use the preferred version (`best`) that supports the feature, in the create room call:

````
POST /_matrix/client/r0/createRoom HTTP/1.1
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "preset": "....",
  "name": "....",
  "topic": "....",
  "creation_content": { ... }
  "room_version": "8"
}
````

If multiple capabilities are needed (e.g mscXX1 and mscXX2), and they have different `best`versions, clients can

> then pick one of the stable version that appears in both `support` array.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
then pick one of the stable version that appears in both `support` arrays.
```

> If multiple capabilities are needed (e.g mscXX1 and mscXX2), and they have different `preferred` versions, clients can

Reviewer 2: I think we should make it clear that for real-world usage, the client implementation or end-user should not be selecting room version, but instead the choice of default & recommended room versions should be made by the server implementor (perhaps tweaked by a knowledgeable server admin).  This is what tripped me up on understanding this MSC.

Reviewer 4: > for real-world usage, the client implementation or end-user should not be selecting room version, but instead the choice of default & recommended room versions should be made by the server implementor 

How would that work with different room versions with entirely different capabilities? For example we currently only have persistent room versions, however, if we also get ephemeral room versions in the future, the server would be unable to select on its own. What I have in mind is the client sending a list of requested capabilities (knock, persistent/ephemeral, reversible redactions) and server returning the latest iteration of the *best matching* room version for those set of capabilities.

Reviewer 5: It doesn’t work that way. An older client won’t  know about the capabilities introduced by the newer server release, therefore won’t be able to request any of those. And the other way around, if the client knows what to do with the new capability (already codified in a given room version) it won’t be able to request it from an older server release unless it already advertises support of that room version. If a user creating a room knows they need a specific room version _and_ their client _and_ homeserver support that room version, the user can request it; if not, defaults kick in.

Author: > What I have in mind is the client sending a list of requested capabilities (knock, persistent/ephemeral, reversible redactions etc.) and server returning the latest iteration of the best matching room version for those set of capabilities.
@KitsuneRal 

This was one of the options, it works for room creation use cases but client would also need to be able to show different settings per room depending on the supported feature, so a capability api would anyway also be needed

Reviewer 5: To show those settings/capabilities, at least one thing I as a client author would expect is a generic framework to receive (and display) human-friendly names for those settings/capabilities (and don't forget l10n...). And then I wonder if having that framework would be less of a development+maintenance chore than simply having the room versions, along with their features, defined in my own code.

> then pick one of the stable version that appears in both `support` arrays.

Reviewer 6: A downside of this is that you can end up on an older room version since there's no ordering, e.g.

* `knocking`: preferred: 7, supports: 7, 8, 9
* `restricted`: preferred 9, supports: 8, 9

From here you could choose 8 or 9, but which to use? Maybe it doesn't really matter. 🤷

Author: can we say that support is ordered?

Reviewer 6: I'm not sure where that information would come from though. The server doesn't really have an ordered list of room versions it prefers.

- `restricted` for restricted join rule support [MSC3083](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3083)

## Client recommendations:

__Notice__: In real world usage most of the time clients should not specify a room version when creating
a room, and should let the Home Server select the correct one (via their knowledgeable server admin).
This is an advanced mechanism to start using feature early.

When presenting room settings, clients should use capabilities in order to display the correct UI. 

For example if the room support knocking, the client should add this option in the join rule chooser
(and if not only show `Invite Only` and `Public` for example).

When creating a room, the client could check if the needed feature is supported by the server before creating.

If the feature is not supported, the client could inform the user that this type of room can't be created
as well as an information message explaining how to contact the home server admin.

If the feature is supported by the default room version, then just continue as usual.

If the feature is supported but by a stable room version that is not the default one, the client should

> then request to use the preferred version (`preferred`) that supports the feature, in the create room call:

Reviewer 6: This seems to imply that unstable room versions *can* be included in the response. This isn't 100% clear from the examples.

Reviewer 7: IMO `preferred` should always be stable, `support` should include all known room versions, inc unstable, as that field is what drives the UI of whether to show a particular setting

````
POST /_matrix/client/r0/createRoom HTTP/1.1
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "preset": "....",
  "name": "....",
  "topic": "....",
  "creation_content": { ... }
  "room_version": "8"
}
````

> In the hypothetical scenario where multiple capabilities would be needed (e.g mscXX1 and mscXX2), and have different `preferred` versions, clients can then pick one of the stable version that appears in both `support` arrays.

Reviewer 6: Is there a benefit to having preferred and support separate as opposed to just an ordered array for support?

Reviewer 7: We might want to be able to say `"preferred": null` whilst only unstable room versions support this, e.g right now for restricted, but still giving the clients the list of supporting room versions to know what UI to show for an experimental room version without needing to hardcode it.

Notice that, it is not recommended to use an unstable room version even if it's the only one supporting a given feature.
It should be reserved for development. This MSC is only about default version not about unstable.

## Unstable prefix

The following mapping will be used for identifiers in this MSC during development:

Proposed final identifier       | Purpose | Development identifier
------------------------------- | ------- | ----

> `room_capabilities` | event type | `org.matrix.msc3244.room_capabilities`

Reviewer 7: PoC implementations:

+ https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/pull/10283

Uses `"preferred": null` for `restricted` to never have `preferred` be an unstable version

        "2": "stable",
        "3": "stable",
        "4": "stable",
        "5": "stable",
        "6": "stable",
        "org.matrix.msc2176": "unstable",
        "org.matrix.msc3083": "unstable"
      }
    },
    "m.change_password": {...}
  }
}
````

Proposed modification.
In the following hypothetical sample, 3 new versions has been introduced (7, 8 and 9) but 6 is still the default.

````
{
  "capabilities": {
    "m.room_versions": {
      "default": "6",
      "available": {
        "1": "stable",
        "...,
        "6": "stable",
        "7": "stable",
        "8": "stable",
        "9": "stable",
        "org.matrix.msc6789": "unstable",
      },
      "room_capabilities": {
          "knock" : {
              "preferred": "7",
              "support" : ["7"]
          },
          "restricted" : {
              "preferred": "9",
              "support" : ["8", "9"]
          }
      }
    }
  }
}
````

A new object is added under `room_capabilities`, each key is the name of a capability.
This object provides the list of room versions supporting this capability as well as the preferred version to use.

As part of this MSC, two capabilities are defined:

> - `knock` for knocking join rule support (msc2403)[https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2403]
> - `restricted` for restricted join rule support (msc3083)[https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3083]

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- `knock` for knocking join rule support [MSC2403](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2403)
- `restricted` for restricted join rule support [MSC3083](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3083)
```

> # MSC3244: Room version capabilities

Reviewer 8: I might be missing something, but I don't see why this data needs to come from the server. Standard room version capabilities don't vary across servers, so the supported features can just be hardcoded into clients. Only the list of supported room versions will vary, but that data is already available from the endpoint.

Reviewer 9: yea... I'm not seeing what this is trying to accomplish. Room versions are meant to be frozen sets of functionality, particularly at the spec level, and not mutated over time. If someone were to create a `com.example.my_room_version` they'd almost certainly have to figure out a nested versioning scheme because once used the room version can't change behaviour.

Author: Currently cients never require a specific room version, and created room are using the default version at the time of creation.

If clients start hard coding room version, they will need to be continuously updated to be up to date. E.g if the default room version is updated (for security reason), the clients will force lower room version

Reviewer 6: I think the idea isn't whether or not the client specifies the room version, but that the clients would encode the information in them for what features a room version supports.

The argument against this is that the servers have to know this already (e.g. [Synapse's implementation](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/blob/d09e24a52d2cdd062efd73bc28e4fe2cd9bbab5e/synapse/api/room_versions.py#L78-L195)), so instead of hard-coding it into each client the server could pass the information to the client.

Maybe that's over-designed though and the proper thing is to codify a similar list in the clients?

Reviewer: The issue with having a list in the clients is that it can get outdated.  If I'm running an old client, and the server says that the default room version is "10", but the client doesn't know what room version "10" is, then it doesn't know if a room created with the default version will support knocking, or if it should specify that it wants room version "7".

Arguably, clients shouldn't be doing anything with room versions that they don't understand, but since most of the room version changes are server-side things, clients have been mostly fine just assuming that everything is (almost) the same.

Reviewer 9: The server can't really be sure it's suggesting the right values though? If a client is developed with v8 in mind, it's not going to really know if v10 will also serve its purpose, and the server definitely won't know how the client expects to function. 

Room versions are non-linear, so in a hypothetical (and possibly likely down the line) scenario we could have v8 for knocking, v9 for enforced encryption, v10 for newfangled knocking+restricted cooperation, and v11 which mixes it all together. In this case, the client will want a feature called "knocking" but doesn't know that v10/11 are actually some completely new approach it has never heard of. It'd be irresponsible of the server to suggest this as a preferred version, but also it's not immediately clear what we'd do given it's keyed by feature name. Further, the server suggesting v11 could impact the user experience of the client even if the client did know about v10 (but not 11): it may very well not want to have encryption baked into the room, but the server will have suggested an unknown room version for new-knocking.

Overall, I do seriously wonder if this can be solved with process rather than tech. If we sped up the room version cutting process, would it alleviate the concerns of this MSC? Can we find a non-technical answer to communicating what is in a given room version and drive uptake?

# MSC3244: Room version capabilities

When a new room version is introduced there is a delay before it becames the default
version. This delay is related to support of this new room version across the federation.

> If a Home Server were to switch the new version as default to early, it will lock out all other users

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
If a homeserver were to switch the new version as default to early, it will lock out all other users
```

Reviewer 9: applies throughout

{
  "capabilities": {
    "m.room_versions": {
      "default": "6",
      "available": {
        "1": "stable",
        "...,
        "6": "stable",
        "7": "stable",
        "8": "stable",
        "9": "stable",
        "org.matrix.msc6789": "unstable",
      },
      "room_capabilities": {
          "knock" : {
              "preferred": "7",
              "support" : ["7"]
          },
          "restricted" : {
              "preferred": "9",
              "support" : ["8", "9"]
          }
      }
    }
  }
}
````

A new object is added under `room_capabilities`, each key is the name of a capability.
This object provides the list of room versions supporting this capability as well as the preferred version to use.

`preferred` should never point to an unstable version. When a feature is only supported by an unstable version, `preferred`should be set to null, and the unstable versions would be listed in `support`.

````
"restricted": {
    "preferred": null,
    "support": [
        "org.matrix.msc3083"
    ]
}
````

As part of this MSC, two capabilities are defined:
- `knock` for knocking join rule support [MSC2403](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2403)

> - `restricted` for restricted join rule support [MSC3083](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3083)

Reviewer 10: Are we allowing unstable capabilities to be added here?

It would be good to add a note that unstable capabilities are allowed with prefixes.
